INTRODUCTION: TRANSLATING BOOK

Book is undergoing a major media transition as print wanes in its
dominance and the internet and mobile devices transform our reading
habits. With the ever entangled histories of bible and book, *this
emerging media age and its transformation of reading practices begs us
to imagine bible as an anarchic interface, a space of contact where
meaning is produced without the reign of an original*.

Thinking of bible as an interface rather than simply as a container for
content will allow us to explore the possibilities of emerging
technologies to translate and transform enduring traditions of bible
reading into the coming media age without succumbing to the temptations
of typical media binaries of new and old, good and bad. As we consider
the design of book interfaces that provoke probabilistic production in
the practice of reading, I will advocate for attention to an affordance
of anarchy that dethrones the governing role of a singular original
without eradicating useful historical relations. Bible reading
communities throughout history have provided some models for this
anarchic interface and can provide important guidance and wisdom as we
explore emerging media capacities for our relationship with books.

Building on Johanna Drucker's work with interface theory and the
Humanities, I will begin with a look at interface as a way of
interrupting the container notion of book and suggesting a greater focus
on relationality and reading practices in our discussion of media
transitions and reading interface design. Then, based on the philosophy
of Emmanuel Levinas, I will argue for an anarchic relationality that
ought to shape our interface design toward creative encounter that
resists emerging media dispositions toward consumption. With the
possibility and value of anarchic interface established, I will then
suggest ways to pursue bible as anarchic interface in our emerging media
age. A look back at the performance of anarchic interface on the
Talmudic page and in illuminated medieval manuscripts will inform our
both the theory and design of our interfaces. Finally, I will beckon us
forward by offering two experiments that highlight the challenges and
possibilities of anarchic interface design and will offer some
possibilities in light of the pervasive anxiety about human relationship
and reading practices in today's media environment.

Before we get started into our exploration of interface, why even bother
with these questions of bible, book, and technology?

**Emergence of a Medium**

From the birth of the codex to the fall of the bible, medium has
mattered in the life of bible both in its necessary entanglement with
content and in its significant social effects. In *The Birth of the
Codex*,[^1] Roberts and Skeat give us a careful look at the storied
material history of the technology that has come to dominate our
cultural idea of book, the codex. Nearly half of the pages of their own
codex are devoted to the role of early Christian practices of scripture
in the rise of the codex to prominence as a book technology, with this
bold claim emerging from their analysis of the manuscript data:[^2]

![](media/image1.tiff){width="6.5in" height="2.765277777777778in"}

Acknowledging the difficulty of firmly establishing the ‘biblical’
category and signaling their sensitivity to the narrow provenance of
manuscript evidence, all in Egypt, Roberts and Skeat still resoundingly
suggest that bible as book begins exclusively as a papyrus codex. Newer
manuscript evidence and different approaches to categories have
challenged the ‘always’ of this conclusion. Yet, the strangeness of this
early Christian preference for codex has been reinforced by many more
recent explorations of this evidence.[^3]

In a book that deeply shaped my own ideas about the adoption of codex
technology by Christians, *Books and Readers*,[^4] Harry Gamble focuses
more on the readerly use of early Christian texts than on their literary
production. Though he may differ in his conclusions from Roberts and
Skeat, there is little doubt that bible played a part in the emergence
of a new interface.[^5] In my own work on the book as a technology for
scripture in antiquity, I found a combination of Gamble, Epp, and
O'Donnell provided a compelling picture of the usefulness of the
portable notebook becoming associated with Christian leaders, and hence
with authority.[^6]

**Twilight of an Icon **

The first chapter of Timothy Beal’s book *The Rise and Fall of the
Bible* is titled ‘The End of the Word as we Know It,’ and he feels
fine.[^7]

![](media/image2.tiff){width="6.5in" height="2.577777777777778in"}

The cultural iconicity of 'the Bible' as 'the Book of books' that is
undergoing deconstruction is the bible as authoritative, univocal,
practical, accessible, comprehensive, and exclusive.[^8] As Beal also
notes, it is not a coincidence that this transformation of the bible as
cultural icon coincides with a major cultural translation of the book as
a medium.[^9]

![](media/image3.tiff){width="6.5in" height="1.7222222222222223in"}

Just as in antiquity, bible played a role in the emergence of a new book
technology, so today, bible as book is entangled in a media transition
from the reign of print to a proliferation of interfaces in our emerging
media age.

**Medium Matters **

In *Understanding Media: The Extensions of Man*,[^10] Marshall McLuhan
points us toward the cracks in the reign of print, that illustrious
descendent of the codex, in the face of an emerging electronic age.
McLuhan reminds us that technologies (media) are extensions of
ourselves and that the message of every medium is its effect on our
social relations.[^11]

![](media/image4.tiff){width="6.5in" height="3.1791666666666667in"}

Beyond the obvious and important entanglement of form and content,
McLuhan emphasizes the impact of technologies on human relationship with
the world and one another through a ‘change of scale’ not simply a
newness of kind.[^12]

![](media/image5.tiff){width="6.5in" height="1.3527777777777779in"}

Here, McLuhan challenges our binary tendencies between new and old and
suggests that media emerge as a change in ‘existing processes’ that
inevitably have social consequences. It is precisely this change in
existing processes we find in the amplification of non-linear access
from the emergence of the codex to the ubiquity of digital search.
McLuhan suggests that the content of every ‘new’ medium is another
existing medium.[^13] Just as the codex performed the multiple columns
per page of a scroll, so internet search performs and amplifies the
print index. I refer to this phenomenon of media building upon and
containing its predecessors as *material media translation*. The
language of translation is helpful here because it signals that all
media transformations involve a negotiation between new and old with
inevitable loss and gain. I use the phrase 'material media' to qualify
this translation to differentiate this process from the common process
of translation of texts into other forms of media such as sound and
film. In material media translation, it is the materiality of the
interface of the medium that is translated, not simply its 'content,'
whatever that might entail.

My favorite material metaphor for this process of material media
translation is a palimpsest, a manuscript that has been written on,
erased, and then written on again. With each new medium writing over an
existing medium (or many media) with only partial erasure, material
media translation enacts a kind of palimpsest. Below is an image of a
page from *Codex Ephraemi Rescriptus*,[^14] a fifth century manuscript
of biblical texts in Greek, washed and written over in the 12th century
with Greek translations of the fourth century Syriac writings of Ephrem
the Syrian. This beautiful material enactment of palimpsest, two column
miniscule Greek translations of Syriac over single column uncial Greek
biblical texts, illustrates marvelously the process of emerging media
building upon existing structures to make something new.

![](media/image6.tiff){width="6.5in" height="4.875in"}

**Figure 1: Image of Codex Ephraemi Rescriptus 1v**[^15]

In light of this process of material media translation as palimpsest,
remembering bible's rich media history will provide a helpful context
and data for imagining how bible might be practiced as interface amidst
the changing reading dispositions of our emerging media age. The
material media translation of book from manuscript page to mobile screen
already has and will continue to shape our reading practices. Focusing
on book as interface, a space for encounter, will highlight the
importance of the materiality of these interfaces in producing our
reading practices.

CHAPTER 1: INTERFACE

**Face to Face**

Why would I suggest that bible or book could be thought of as an
interface? Often, we associate interface with digital technologies.
Human Computer Interface (HCI) and Graphical User Interface (GUI) have
become major area of study and discourse in the world of software
design. Yet, the word 'face' has come to signify human interaction
unmediated by digital technologies in the common phrase 'face to face.'
There is a great deal of discussion these days about the different
values of online/virtual/digital interaction and the so-called 'face to
face.' For example, Sherry Turkle has become a prominent public voice in
discussions of technology and its social effect, as evidenced in the
impressive attention[^16] captured by her new book, *Reclaiming
Conversation: The Power of Talk in a Digital Age*.[^17] I first
encountered Turkle's work while engaging a Richard Cohen article,
'Ethics and Cybernetics: Levinasian Reflections,'[^18] in my struggle
with the face to face language in online education. Using her work from
1995, *Life on the Screen*,[^19] Cohen offers Turkle as an example of
media scholars who champion the advantages of cybernetics and internet
communication technologies for redefining subjectivities in the
direction of post-modern notions of multiplicity and instability.[^20]

Turkle's more recent work has shifted focus from this earlier
celebration of the fragmented self to a serious anxiety about the
effects of robotics and mobile devices on our social capacities as
humans.[^21] Two minutes into a 2015 NPR interview titled 'Making the
Case For Face to Face in an Era of Digital Conversation,'[^22] Turkle
suggests that 'face to face conversation is the most human and
humanizing thing that we do, it's where we learn to put ourselves in the
place of the other.' For many, this phrase, 'face to face,' as Turkle
uses it has come to represent 'real' human interaction as opposed to a
weak simulation or even cheap imitation that happens through internet
media.

Part of why the language of inter\*face\* compels me is because it can
unsettle this binary between digital interfaces and this 'face to face'
advocated by Turkle. Conversation over the coffee table and exchanges on
Twitter can both be understood as interface and both are mediated by
technologies if we understand language as a technology. So, this term,
'interface,' pushes beyond any digital/analog or virtual/real
dichotomies and demands that we think about interface design in whatever
media we find ourselves using. In a way, we could imagine 'interface,'
the intersection of faces, as a useful translation of the phrase 'face
to face.'

If we look at the basic uses of 'interface' in the English language, we
can see the strong indication of interaction and connection as well as
the prevalent use in the computing arena.

![](media/image7.tiff){width="6.5in" height="6.102777777777778in"}

Here in these definitions,[^23] we can see that the 'face to face'
championed by Turkle and others can easily fit into the notion of
interface as 'a point where two subjects meet or interact.' When I take
up the language of interface, I am not limiting our conversation to
digital technologies that afford human interaction with machines. I hope
to explore interface as a broader category for spaces of encounter that
include many forms of media and mediation.

**Zone of Encounter**

Johanna Drucker offers an approach to interface that fits well with this
idea of spaces of encounter. In her essay, 'Humanities Approaches to
Interface Theory,' Drucker helpfully intertwines digital media studies
explorations of interface design with humanities questions of
subjectivity.[^24] In an exemplary fashion, Drucker demonstrates a
reflexive practice by stating her desire to explore the theory
undergirding her own scholarly working environments at the cusp of a
transition from print to other dominant media/interfaces.[^25]

![](media/image8.tiff){width="6.5in" height="4.045833333333333in"}

Drucker shows her awareness of the shifts at work in the emerging
digital media age and asks us as humanists to become a part of the
process of constructing a theory to support the design of our reading
and writing spaces as a counter balance to the often mechanistic
principles at work in software design.[^26] I see this project as
contributing to these efforts and I am grateful for the challenge from
Drucker and others. As she looks to GIS, social networking, and
visualization for hints of new possibilities, we may even look back into
print technologies (e.g. Talmudic page) for some suggestions toward
interface design that might afford a bible textual apparatus that is
'constellationary, distributed, and multi-faceted.'

Combining graphical reading analysis, frame analysis, and a
constructivist model of subjectivity, Drucker gives us a view of
interface as more of a theatre than a window.[^27]

![](media/image9.tiff){width="6.5in" height="3.4881944444444444in"}

Instead of a thing, interface is a zone of encounter. So, if we turn
toward books and reading more specifically, 'Interface is *what we read*
and *how we read* combined through engagement.’[^28] This is a critical
point in the relationship of bible and/as media. If an interface
involves both what we read and how we read, the design of the book
technologies we use when reading shapes the reading performance and
meaning made as much as the content. Reading bible in a codex is a
different zone of encounter than reading bible on an iPhone, thus, both
the book and the reader are constituted differently in these two
interfaces. This means that the transitions from scroll to codex and
codex to internet are not simply new ways of reading the same content.
Rather, bible and reader are both transformed in the new space of
encounter made possible by these different interfaces.

Another way to state the importance of interface in the reading process
is to suggest that the structures of a particular book technology ARE
information, not merely a means of access to information. This is
another way of bothering the dichotomy between form and content or
medium and message. In this interface as zone of encounter, medium and
message are so inextricably entangled that attempting to tease them
apart is futile. Drucker highlights this well, saying,[^29]

![](media/image10.tiff){width="6.5in" height="2.41875in"}

In this example, the 'page'[^30] is not simply a window through which a
user accesses data. Rather, the page is a part of the data and the data,
in part, structures the page. So, with a codex, the space of the page is
part of the data of the text, not simply a delivery mechanism. The shift
from zone to space in Drucker's language here, particularly a space that
is something other than a space 'between,' surfaces a potential contact
between interface and thirdspace in Edward Soja.

**Interface as Thirdspace**

Drucker is mostly focused on scholarly reading and writing practices and
the role of the human subject in the construction of these spaces. If
interface is a space of encounter, but something more than simply a
space between, then we can imagine resonances between Drucker's
interface theory and Edward Soja's notion of thirdspace. Interface as
space can push beyond the intersection of two systems toward creating
spaces that foster emergence. As I mentioned earlier, the term
'interface' has the potential to challenge the binary struggle between
both the virtual (digital) and real (face to face) and the what and the
how of reading practice. One of the most important operations of
thirdspace for Soja is to challenge any form of cultural inquiry that
reduces to binaries, so Druker's interface is already participating in a
value of thirdspace. In fact, the subtitle of Soja's *Thirdspace*[^31]
holds together the terms of this virtual/real binary by exploring
'real–and–imagined places.'

Soja builds off of Henri Lefebvre's work in *Production of Space*[^32]
to suggest an important role for spatiality in the process of cultural
meaning making. Soja begins his introduction with a focus on
participatory construction of space which sounds like the practice of
interface in Drucker.[^33]

![](media/image11.tiff){width="6.5in" height="1.7173611111111111in"}

This idea that we are "intrinsically spatial beings" is one example of
Drucker's suggestion of a constructivist subjectivity. For both Soja and
Drucker it is not simply that we together construct space but also that
spaces construct us as we construct spaces. Soja's mention of social
consequences here makes me think of Marsh McLuhan's famous adage that
the medium is the message. Though often misunderstood as reductionist or
absolutist, McLuhan is simply suggesting that the message of any medium
is its social effect not the content it contains.[^34] Both Soja and
Drucker do us a favor to remind us that our materiality which can be
called media or can be called spatiality has a significant impact on our
sociality. This is precisely what I hear McLuhan saying in the medium is
the message.

As we have seen, Drucker's notion of interface already challenges
binaries and encourages a more spatial and material and constructed
notion of both media and the subject. So, why add thirdspace into the
mix? What Soja'a thirdspace ads to our emerging theory of interface is
his approach of 'thirding as Othering,' which practices an infinite
preference for an alternative when faced with a binary choice.[^35] This
explicit and intentional methodology of surfacing multiplicity when
faced with a binary may not guide interface design or theory like it
does Soja's cultural critique. Yet, what I hear in Lefebvre's *il y a
toujour l'Autre* and in Soja's thirding-as-Othering is a disposition
toward emergence of the chaotic kind, alternatives that challenge
established categories and resist closed analysis without a need to
eradicate these categories. Interface as thirdspace pushes the
multiplicity Drucker encourages in her framing of interface toward a
property of emergence in interface that will always overflow our
analysis. Drucker says,[^36]

![](media/image12.tiff){width="6.5in" height="1.5694444444444444in"}

Drucker resists the strictly functional and mechanistic theories of
interface design and asks humanists to imagine something more variable
and responsive to the particularities of the people and the spaces
involved in interface. Interface as thirdspace suggests that even these
combinatorial particularities do not produce the total set of
possibilities, 'there is always an-Other.'

**Interface as Translation**

With Piotr Blumczynski's new book *Ubiquitous Translation*[^37] and the
focus on the WHAT and HOW, I feel like I could link the WHAT and HOW of
reading in Drucker to the WHAT and HOW of translation and suggest that
interface is a kind of translational event. In a sense then, we have at
least two kinds of translations going on with bible, a material media
translation of book from print codex to mobile phone as well as the
translational act that is interface.

**Book as Interface**

So, we have moved from the mechanistic idea of interface as a thing
through which we view data, to a constructivist interface as a zone of
encounter that constitutes a space and a subject, finally to a spatial
interface as thirdspace with a disposition toward interruptive
emergence. The important strand that follows this trajectory is the
continued challenge to any compartmentalization of what and how we read.
Just as interface is not simply a thing we look through, a book is not
just a container for content. A book is an invitation to an encounter in
the practice of reading and the materiality of this encounter has as
much to tell us about meaning as the stories we read.

Near the end of her exhortation to humanities scholars to take seriously
the task of building a theory of interface, Drucker reminds us that book
has always been an interface.[^38]

![](media/image13.tiff){width="6.5in" height="5.647916666666666in"}

I quote Drucker here at length for two reasons. First, I have at times
been prone to and accused of the charming 'strict binarisms and
technophilic exuberance' Drucker cautions of here. Though I have found
hyperbolic rhetoric useful at times to unsettle our unquestioned
assumptions about media, I want to be exceedingly clear that, with
Drucker, I am not interested in propagating some old/new hierarchical
dichotomy between codex and emerging book technologies. This is why I
began with material media translation as a palimpsest in my
introduction. Each emerging book technology is a translation of what
came before it, a writing over that never fully replicates and only
partially erases.

Second, this passage from Drucker begins and ends with a reminder that
book has always been an interface. As the materiality of this interface
shifts, we will undoubtedly learn from previous forms as we explore the
affordances of emerging technologies. The last full sentence of this
passage captures nicely the importance of understanding book as
interface. To paraphrase in alliterative fashion, Drucker suggests that
a book is an interface that *provokes probabilistic production* through
the reading event.[^39] Let's look closely at each of these p-words in
reverse order, production, probabilistic, and provokes.

Production

Drucker continues to pound home her constructivist approach to both
subject and text by reiterating that a text or work is *produced* in the
encounter facilitated by the book. This is another way of stating that
book is not simply a window or a container through which we access and
consume a text. Rather, book is a space (is it too reductionist to
correlate space and 'a structured environment' in Drucker?) that begs an
encounter between reader and the structured environment of the interface
and more. Drucker's foregrounding of reading as production rather than
simple consumption of a text reminds me of the problematization of the
production/consumption binary in Michel de Certeau's work, *The Practice
of Everyday Life*.[^40]

De Certeau's explorations of 'the practice of everyday life' respect the
deep concerns about commodification so well articulated by many
materialist critiques of culture, yet questions the often accompanying
low view of mass culture and pessimism concerning the everyman. De
Certeau restores some poetic dignity to the masses by reframing
consumption as *production*, giving each person in each moment an agency
in the meaning making endeavor.[^41]

![](media/image14.tiff){width="6.5in" height="2.345138888888889in"}

I am not explicitly taking up the power dynamics de Certeau so
beautifully explores in this work. Yet, his consistent challenge of the
production/consumption binary without erasing the role of the structures
or the participation of the 'consumer' reinforces our approach here of
book as interface that provokes production. De Certeau also helpfully
reminds me that book as interface does not necessarily erase the
operations of book as container. The container attributes of book remain
as a part of the material structures that constitute the potential
productive space of the interface.

De Certeau uses reading as one of his examples of "everyday practices
that produce without capitalizing.”[^42] He notes the often assumed
writing-reading binary as a specific example of the
production-consumption binary, but articulates a notion of reading that
can not be reduced to this dichotomy. Reading is a "silent production,”
"a play of spaces,” "an 'art' which is anything but passive,” and most
poingnantly, reading "transforms another person's property into a space
borrowed for a mo-ment by a transient.”[^43]  Reading as everyday
practice is a poiesis, a making, within structured constraints that
resists the production-consumption binary and thus offers a notion of
reading as encounter that produces both the reader and the text.

Probabilistic

In an essay titled 'Entity to Event: From Literal, Mechanistic
Materiality to Probabilistic Materiality,' Drucker expounds in much more
detail her use of the term probabilistic as it relates to reading
interfaces.[^44]

![](media/image15.tiff){width="6.5in" height="3.6152777777777776in"}

We can tell even in 'Interface Theory,' that probabilistic is an
alternative to mechanistic for Drucker in her analysis of the
shortcomings of interface design as driven by the software development
world.[^45] Here, in this passage from 'Entity to Event,' with its
strange alignment, we can see her ability to both show and tell the role
of materiality in the reading event. This claim of event rather than
entity is parallel to my suggestion that book as interface is an
encounter not just a container. The basic distinction between the
mechanistic and the probabilistic for Drucker is that the former
attempts to present a user with an entity to consume, while the latter
presents the reader with a set of possibilities that condition at
reading event that will inevitably be new every time.[^46]

![](media/image16.tiff){width="6.5in" height="1.9388888888888889in"}

This points back, in a way, to the interruptive emergence we found in
Soja's notion of thirdspace and begs a further discussion about the role
of complexity theory in Drucker's concept of interface as event.

&gt; MORE ON COMPLEXITY, PROBABILITY, AND EMERGENCE.

Rather than simply presenting a user with an entity to consume, a
probabilistic materiality of interface *provokes* production of both
text and subject in the practice of reading. Let's look more closely at
the provocation of interface, which Drucker suggests is related to the
cues and clues an interface offers for the performance of a text.

Provoke

I love that Drucker celebrates the provocation of reading interfaces. A
codex doesn't simply lay passive on the shelf waiting to be opened and
penetrated by the reader. The materiality of the book as interface
participates in and even provokes a reading event. A page from a book in
Amazon reader on my iPhone, which gives me as reader all kinds of power
over the page, provokes a possibility set of reading tactics, even if
not entirely determinative. Book as container just waits to be consumed,
book as interface provokes encounter.

This provocation reminds us that interface is an active participant as
structured environment in the production of meaning that is a reading
event. One way to talk about the material dispositions of an interface
is through affordances. Affordances are the set of real or perceived use
possibilities offered by the material design of an interface *in
relationship to a particular user and context*. The history of the term
affordance is well established, beginning with James J. Gibson in the
field of psychology and brought into the realm of HCI through Donald
Norman's book *The Psychology of Everyday Things*, which is charmingly
known as POET.[^47]

![](media/image17.tiff){width="6.5in" height="1.2979166666666666in"}

This is what Norman offers as a definition of affordance.[^48] As
McGrenere and Ho demonstrate, there is a lot of debate and extension
around this definition. For our purposes, the importance of affordance
is that there are material properties of an interface that present a
possibility set of uses to a reader. This is different than affordances
'determining' the reading event or even the total set of possibilities
for use. Here, I prefer to reach back to Gibson's use of affordance in
that he defines affordance relationally. MORE...

Affordances as a set of possibilities in a given field remind me of
Pierre Bourdieu's notion of habitus. Contrast the set of
structures/possibilities in interface affordance to the structuring
structures that present a subject with a possibility set in a field.
Neither are determinative for practice, but they do shape the space
significantly. MORE...

**Pathways**

Pathways Project

Thankfully, we already have some compelling and instructive examples of
people trying to design book as interface in our emerging media age.
John Miles Foley's *Pathways Project*[^49] offers an amazing example of
exploring book as interface that provokes probabilistic production in
the reading process. The Pathways Project explores the analogies between
oral tradition (oAgora) and the internet (eAgora) in their shared
challenge to the operations of print media (tAgora). The Pathways
Project is full of insights and limits, both of which can provide useful
launching places for our experiments here with book as interface.

Future of Academic Book

In her essay, Drucker makes some hints toward what we might find in
emerging scholarly interpretive reading interfaces. There is a movement
afoot that is gently and gradually trying to take seriously this call to
imagine the academic book as interface in our emerging media landscape.
The Future of the Academic Book project began as a collaborative
project...Though I have had a hard time seeing how the FOAB project has
interrupted the established dispositions of print and codex to allow the
possibilities of emerging technologies, the community of discourse that
has fostered this movement has most definitely demonstrated a desire for
and commitment to a constructivist and collaborative process. Their
patience and respect for tradition could create the necessary space for
translation of the deeply ingrained material sensibilities embedded in
the culture of the academic book. I hope to incorporate the innovative
spirit and the patient wisdom of both Drucker and the FOAB project as we
push toward imagining bible as interface.

We now have a model of book as interface that provokes probabilistic
production in the practice of reading and some examples of design in
this direction. In the next chapter, I will advocate for one particular
affordance in our design of bible as interface, anarchy.

CHAPTER 5: MEDIATING PROXIMITY

**Proxinity - Contact Without Grasp**

Through the generous support of the Baker-Nord Center for the Humanities
at Case Western Reserve University, I have had the privilege of working
with an inspiring and inquisitive team to collaboratively explore ways
in which digital media technologies might unsettle our notions of sacred
text translation. Over the past year, Timothy Beal, Sarah Gridley, Eric
Pellish, William Deal, and I have been working remotely and
residentially to imagine a web application that would shape a
disposition of attention to ambiguity in the translation processes of
Genesis 1.1. This ongoing project through Baker-Nord deeply shapes one
of the material bible experiments in my dissertation which I have called
"facing the deep." Below I outline some early discussions of interface
possibilities for this web application, including my incredibly rough
sketches.

Even though our current project app is called *Tohu*, I am toying with
an app name of proxinity as a mashup of proximity and infinity to signal
my value on shaping dispositions toward reading as contact without
grasp. Sarah Gridley helpfully raised the concern that "contact without
grasp" could connote a kind of consumptive tourism or voyerism. This is
decidedly NOT what I am hoping from proxinity. So, along the way, I hope
to reflect on the difference between cantact as consumptive tourism that
tokenizes and contact as encounter that engages deeply without a demand
for full comprehension.

**Hints and Openings**

Several technologies have shaped my imagination of what might be
possible in an app that facilitates dispositions of close reading,
encounter and opening.

-   \[diigo\]([*https://www.diigo.com/user/mphemenway*](https://www.diigo.com/user/mphemenway))\
    a deeply collaborative tool where communities can annotate and
    discuss web artifacts in the space of the 'page' itself. A wonderful
    enactment of participatory reading as making. Diigo also has some
    social media aggregation possibilities than can lead to further
    conversation around fragments.

-   \[rebelmouse\]([*https://www.rebelmouse.com/aproximatebible/*](https://www.rebelmouse.com/aproximatebible/))\
    My preferred social media aggregator and an integral part of this
    dissertation project. Rebelmouse is a hashtag structured community
    aggregation tool that can pull together endless channels into
    a stream. What I love about rebelmouse is the spatial proximity of
    fragments that come from all kinds of different sources, both people
    and platforms.

-   \[genius - The Waste
    Land\]([*http://genius.com/Ts-eliot-the-waste-land-annotated/*](http://genius.com/Ts-eliot-the-waste-land-annotated/))\
    Genius is a fantastic tool for crowd/community annotation of text
    that allows media annotations as well as text. Another tool that
    embodies reading as making, but I wish the base text didn't remain
    so dominant in the space of the tool. Genius is a new media
    translation of marginalia of sorts, but with a different spatiality
    determined by a digital notion of page.

-   \[on
    broadway\]([*http://www.on-broadway.nyc*](http://www.on-broadway.nyc/))\
    A recent project by one of my favorite new media scholars, Lev
    Manovich, and others. Both a physical installation and a web
    application that perform a material media translation of a 1966
    print piece. A radically new spatial rendering of life in the city
    using large and dynamic social media data sets. The infinite
    entanglement of data and interface in this project is a great model
    for making new media objects.

-   \[ArtLENS\]([*http://www.clevelandart.org/gallery-one/artlens*](http://www.clevelandart.org/gallery-one/artlens))\
    A new media translation of access to a fixed museum collection.
    ARTLens has many interesting features in both the large touchscreen
    installation and the mobile app, especially realted to user
    generated pathways as a part of the growing dataset.

**Two Lobes of Infinity**

I think of our application design as the constant interplay of the two
lobes of the infinity sign. *Lobe 1* is an ongoing and iterative machine
learning process taking data from sources and from user interaction and
creating correlative **metadata** via semantic connection to conceptual
domains.

-   OCR and image recognition tools 'read' media for potential terms or
    attributes that can be passed into the conceptual algorithm map for
    metadata processing.

-   Using an object oriented database problematizes the strict
    database/interface dichotomy often operative in app design.

-   Natural language processing provides the algorithms to take streams
    of data and find correlations between artifacts and create the
    corresponding metadata by moving back and forth between semantic and
    conceptual realms. My colleague Justin Barber suggests we look at a
    tool called
    \[WordNet\]([*https://wordnet.princeton.edu*](https://wordnet.princeton.edu/))
    to help our application correlate semantic data with higher order
    conceptual frameworks to enable metadata correlations beyond direct
    semantic or linguistic equivalence. Here, at the programmatic level,
    we would be embodying a value on problematizing simple notions of
    equivalence in translation.

*Lobe 2* involves rendering an interface that allows user interaction
with and participation in constellations of artifacts that make up the
lives of a text/tradition.

-   Interface will model contact without grasp and hopefully develop new
    reading dis-positions toward attention to ambiguity.

-   We could moderate user input regarding additional artifacts and
    possible correlations between and feed into machine
    learning process.

-   Like ARTLens, we could also use user pathway data as a source for
    NLP metadata learning.

**Initial Design Principles**

*Begin with NRSV*

The proxinity interface could offer one translation as the initial point
of contact. I suggest NRSV here simply out of pragmatics of possible
translation projects in the near future. One alternative here would be
to randomly select one translation/version from the existing dataset as
the initial contact text, limited by browser language setting and/or
user profile preference.

*Define Units*

Ideally, emulating the Genius platform, we would have an algorithm and
an interface that would allow users to select a portion of text (e.g.
highlight 3 words or entire sentence) and have the application generate
the corresponding constellation on the fly based on selection. Yet,
perhaps for an initial phase, we define units of text from the chosen
contact translation (NRSV) and make these independently touchable to
move into the corresponding constellation. Artifacts in the collection
could appear in many constellations depending on the NLP constructed
metadata and its connection to multiple portions of the contact text.

*Initial Interface *

Users arrive at app and are presented with the contact translation as
NRSV. A touch on a portion of text zooms to that portion of text as
shimmering objects making up letters, almost as if letters are buzzing
and then these objects release from formation in letters into a slowly
swirling constellation of objects. Should we keep the contact text
phrase on the screen above the swirling constellation to remind user of
their path?

![](media/image18.tiff){width="6.5in" height="4.875in"}

To the left of the constellation will be a clickable cloud of object
type toggles to allow filtering of artifacts in constellation by
particular object types. All types will be on by default. Clicking on a
type marker one time will remove that object type from the constellation
and clicking again will bring these objects back into the swirl. To the
right of the constellation will be a clickable cloud of concept toggles
for filtering in a similar fashion. We could have countless clouds or
cascading clouds that allowed filtering by different attributes
(language, time period, genre, etc.).

![](media/image19.tiff){width="6.5in" height="4.875in"}

Our team discussed having ways to organize the swirling artifacts (e.g.
versions) by time or other attribute for pedagogical aims (e.g. show
historical trajectory of translations for comparison and showing
geneology).

*Item View*

A click on any object will bring it into focus and show annotations,
share options, and maybe even a way to suggest correlation with another
object in constellation (search by concept). The annotation feature will
allow general comments and spatially located point specific annotations.
All annotations can be text, image, html embeds, audio, or video. I'm
guessing we will want annotation moderation of some sort and definitely
require account registration to participate like this. I would like to
call this participation "translation," to emphasize the point that
participating in the engagement of a text and tradition is translation.

![](media/image20.tiff){width="6.5in" height="4.875in"}

Item view will also offer clickable clouds of related concepts and
object types as in constellation view. Yet, in item view, a click on a
cloud item will take user to a new constellation based on their
selection to move to other constellations. Maybe the object type cloud
would keep user in the same contact translation space but give
constellation of similar object types as item. BUT, concept cloud would
take user to new constellation not based on contact translation segment,
but rather on conceptual attribute. In this case, we would need a way
for users to move from conceptual constellation to related contact
translation segments? Maybe one of the material limits we put on the
interface is that access to constellations is always tied to contact
translation segment?

*Sources *

We would recruit our friends to help find suitable sources for artifacts
that our algorithm could use for ongoing training and collecting. Many
sources are already available and we will be building both an
aggregation of these existing sources and asking for people to
contribute artifacts (e.g. drawings or pictures of catacomb art related
to a contact translation segment). All artifacts included would come
with source link so that user can always push out to other spaces for
further exploration. I have no desire to keep user traffic inside app or
to absorb artifacts into our own dataset! We will simply use pointers to
sources but we will handle annotations, etc. within the app. Some
possible sources or source types might be:

-   [*bible.com*](http://bible.com/) for translations

-   versions in ancient languages as well (not THE Hebrew, but a set
    of Hebrew/Greek/etc. versions that shape contact with this passage,
    let's not even assume MT as original)

-   literature (ancient near east creation epics)

-   art

-   manuscripts (e.g. api for sinaiticus or for U of Michigan
    collection, etc.)

-   video (initially cull textual metadata from vimeo and youtube
    description, title and even captions. beyond this, there are tools
    that can watch the video and extract metadata)

-   music

-   architecture

-   social media engagement with related hashtags

[^1]: Colin H. Roberts and T. C. Skeat. *The Birth of Codex* (London:
    Oxford University Press, 1970).

[^2]: Roberts and Skeat, *Birth of Codex*, 42. I have elected to embed
    images of block quotes from the interface in which I read them to
    signal the multimedia and intertextual nature of my work. Allowing
    the images to interrupt the flow of letters can encourage us to
    engage these other voices as material artifacts that may have
    different material affordances than those at work in this document.

[^3]: Examples to come.

[^4]: Harry Y. Gamble, *Books and Readers in the Early Church: A History
    of Early Christian Texts* (New Haven, Yale University Press,
    1995)..cLuhan, \*l ions of ManHoughton Mifflinf an Accidental Book
    (Boston: Harcourt voices as material artifacts that may have differ

[^5]: Add a sample from Gamble here about emergence of codex in xian use
    and add a note about other perspectives on role of bible in codex
    development - Gamble, Hurtado, etc. Offer p.oxy 1075 and nongbri
    article as an example.

[^6]: Expand a bit here and cite Epp, O’Donnell, and Wagner.

[^7]: Timothy K. Beal, The Rise and Fall of the Bible: The Unexpected
    History of an Accidental Book (Boston: Houghton Mifflin Harcourt,
    2011), Kindle edition, location 371. See
    <https://youtu.be/Z0GFRcFm-aY> for a sense of the cultural reference
    embedded in this chapter title.

[^8]: Beal, *Rise and Fall*, Kindle location 121-122.

[^9]: Beal, *Rise and Fall*, kindle location 1161.

[^10]: Marshall McLuhan, *Understanding Media: The Extensions of Man*
    (New York: McGraw-Hill, 1964).

[^11]: McLuhan, *Understanding Media*, 7-8.

[^12]: McLuhan, *Understanding Media*, 8.

[^13]: McLuhan, *Understanding Media*, 8.

[^14]: [*http://gallica.bnf.fr/ark:/12148/btv1b8470433r*](http://gallica.bnf.fr/ark:/12148/btv1b8470433r)

[^15]: Codex Ephraemi Rescriptus 1v view 15,
    <http://gallica.bnf.fr/ark:/12148/btv1b8470433r/f15.item> taken from
    the iOS app Gallica by Bibliothèque nationale de France
    (https://appsto.re/us/FhPFH.i).

[^16]: https://storify.com/textpotential/turkle-face-to-face

[^17]: Sherry Turkle, *Reclaiming Conversation: The Power of Talk in a
    Digital Age* (New York: Penguin Press, 2015).

[^18]: Richard A. Cohen, 'Ethics and Cybernetics: Levinasian
    Reflections,’ *Ethics and Information Technology* 2, no. 1 (March
    2000): 27-35.

[^19]: Sherry Turkle, *Life on the Screen: Identity in the Internet Age*
    (New York: Simon & Schuster, 1995).

[^20]: Cohen, 'Ethics and Cybernetics,' 27, n. 2.

[^21]: e.g. Sherry Turkle, *Alone Together: Why We Expect More From
    Technology and Less from Each Other* (New York: Basic Books, 2011)
    and Sherry Turkle, *Reclaiming Conversation: The Power of Talk in a
    Digital Age* (New York: Penguin Press, 2015).

[^22]: http://www.npr.org/2015/09/26/443480452/making-the-case-for-face-to-face-in-an-era-of-digital-conversation

[^23]: Google Search for 'interface definition’ on August 1, 2015.

[^24]: Johanna Drucker, ‘Humanities Approaches to Interface Theory,’
    *Culture Machine* 12 (2011): 1-20.

[^25]: Drucker, 'Interface Theory,' 2.

[^26]: Drucker, 'Interface Theory,' 1-2.

[^27]: Drucker, 'Interface Theory,’ 9.

[^28]: Drucker, 'Interface Theory,’ 9.

[^29]: Drucker, 'Interface Theory,' 10.

[^30]: Interesting that this structure of page persists into the
    internet ecosystem. Perhaps more evidence of the palimpsestuous
    nature of media translations

[^31]: Edward W. Soja, *Thirdspace: Journeys to Los Angeles and Other
    Real-and-Imagined Places* (Cambridge, Mass.: Blackwell, 1996).

[^32]: Henri Lefebvre, *The Production of Space* (Cambridge, Mass.:
    Blackwell, 1991).

[^33]: Soja, *Thirdspace*, 1.

[^34]: McLuhan, *Understanding Media*, 8.

[^35]: Edward Soja, 'Afterword,' *Stanford Law Review* 48, no. 5 (May
    1996): 1421.

[^36]: Drucker, ‘Interface Theory,’ 12.

[^37]: Piotr Blumczynski, *Ubiquitous Translation* (New York: Routledge,
    2016).

[^38]: Drucker, 'Interface Theory,' 18.

[^39]: Drucker, 'Interface Theory,' 18.

[^40]: Michel de Certeau, *The Practice of Everyday Life*, trans. Steven
    Rendall (Berkeley: University of California Press, 1984).

[^41]: de Certeau, *Practice*, xviii.

[^42]: de Certeau, *Practice*, xx.

[^43]: de Certeau, *Practice*, xxi-xxii.

[^44]: Johanna Drucker, 'Entity to Event: From Literal, Mechanistic
    Materiality to Probabilistic Materiality,' Parallax 15, no. 4
    (2009): 8.

[^45]: Drucker, 'Interface Theory,' 10.

[^46]: Drucker, 'Entity to Event,' 14.

[^47]: James J. Gibson, (). Donald Norman, *The Psychology of Everyday
    Things* (). See McGrenere and Ho, 'Affordances: Clarifying and
    Evolving a Concept,’ 1, for a brief history of the use of the term.

[^48]: Norman, POET, 9.

[^49]: http://www.pathwaysproject.org/
