# CHAPTER 2: AFFORDING ANARCHY

We have seen that book as interface provokes probabilistic production in a reading event. If part of interface design involves constructing material spaces that might encourage certain affordances, can we design toward a reading process that is anarchic?

My goal here is to connect the notions of anarchy and proximity in Levinas as a theoretical grounding for interface design that affords reading which is not primary governed by consuming the content of a container, but encourages contact without grasp. Just as Drucker offers probabilistic production as an alternative to mechanical determinism, so here, I will offer the anarchy of proximity as an alternative to consumptive mastery. 

As a student of bible for much of my life, in personal practice or scholarly pursuit, the reign of αρχη has dominated both my concept of textual tradition and any notion of manuscript awareness. The archic logocentrism of my evangelical exegetical training became immediately apparent in the first verse we learned to read in Greek - εν αρχη ην ο λογος (John 1.1). It is αρχη and all of its resonances with the *beginning* of LXX Genesis that signals the reign of λογος in a Christian interpretive tradition that claims to take the verbal character of *the* bible seriously as divine revelation. Couple this with the tenth article of the [1978 Chicago Statement of Biblical Inerrancy](http://library.dts.edu/Pages/TL/Special/ICBI_1.pdf), which links inspiration and "the [λογος] of God" with the *original, autographic text of Scripture*, and we can see the deep archic sensibilities of the tradition in which I was reared, even at the material manuscript level.

It took David Parker's careful questioning of this αρχη or original of the manuscript tradition in [*The Living Text of the Gospels*]() to awaken me to the anarchy at work even in the materiality of bible, but without the language of anarchy. Aware of the ancient Greek semantic potential of αρχη, Emmanuel Levinas, another close reader of biblical texts and tradition, introduced me to an anarchy that was something beyond disorder an another order and something significantly more complicated than the simple absence of a beginning or origin. In his essay titled "Substitution," Levinas takes up the relationship between proximity and the αρχη. At many points in this project, we will struggle with the potential of proximity, from spatial nearness and distance to ap-proximat-ion to a notion of contact without grasp. But for now, we will focus on the anarchic.

### without the reign of an original 
Anarchic is a loaded term and can mean many things. 
Contrary to some initial impressions of both my work and my
person, I am not the least interested in a simple notion of anarchy as chaos
or disorder. Along the lines of Levinas, I exploit the variability of the
semantic range of αρχη in Greek and use an-archic to denote a practice of
meaning making without recourse to the *reign* of an *original* (See Simon
Critchley with Peter Atterton and Graham Noctor translating Levinas, [*Basic
Philosophical Writings*](http://amzn.com/0253210798), 81). Levinasian
proximity as an anarchic encounter with the face of the other will offer
questions toward the role of bible in shaping nonconsumptive (ethical) meaning
making.

When I speak of anarchy, I mean something other than a generic absence of
order or a simple negation of rule, origin, or principle. Insofar as chaos is
connected to the emergent properties of complex dynamic systems, I have no
problem with chaos as a fecund space, loaded with potential for meaning. Yet,
shaped by my encounters with the writings of Emmanuel Levinas, something
deeper and more subtle is at work in my sense of the gravity of anarchy.
Exploiting the koine semantic range of αρχη, which can mean beginning and
reign, I hear the an-archic as that which is *without the reign of an
original*.


### Levinas and anarchy

Though the role of the anarchic in the philosophy of Emmanuel Levinas doesn't blossom until the inclusion of Substitution as the core essay in *Otherwise Than Being*, we can see anarchy at work in many of Levinas's writings. In Existents and Existence...

### Totality and Infinity

> The flow of time in which, according to the Kantian schema, the world is constituted is without origin. This world that has lost its principle, an-archical, a world of phenomena, does not answer to the quest for the true; it suffices for enjoyment, which is self-sufficiency itself, nowise disturbed by the evasion that exteriority opposes to the quest for the true. (Levinas 1969, 65)








Levinas's essay, "Substitution," has a manuscript tradition of its own that
offers us an object lesson in the anarchic as "without the reign of an
original." In the introduction to the first English translation of an early
version of the essay, Bernasconi narrates the life of "Substitution" in
[*Emmanuel Levinas: Basic Philosophical Writings*](), p. 79.

Here are three versions of a section of this essay, the french of the later
iteration of the essay in *Autrement qu'être*, it's English translation by
Alphonso Lingis in *Otherwise than Being*, and the English translation of the
1968 version of the essay translated by Simon Critchley, Peter Atterton, and
Graham Noctor. Which is the original? Does it matter?

Alphonso Lingis translating Emmanuel Levinas, *Otherwise than Being*, 100-101.


Emmanuel Levinas, *Autrement qu'être*, 158-160.




Critchley, Atterton, and Noctor translating Levinas, *Emmanuel Levinas: Basic
Philosophical Writings*, 81

Instead of worrying about which of these moments in the life of this essay is
closest to some originary articulation of these ideas from Levinas in his 1967
lecture, can we read them together, an-archically, "as disequilibrium, as
delirium, undoing thematization, eluding *principle*, origin, and will, or
αρχη...*Mouvement, dans le sense originel du terme, an-archique*." 
> I have intentionally created a mashup quote using bits from each of these fragments as a practice of anarchic reading. 

Isn't it interesting that a discussion of the anarchic as eluding or escaping origin points to *le sense originel du terme*? In a way, this contradiction, using the *original* sense of the word an-arche to articulate a methodology that does not privilege an origin or principle, is precisely the point. As Simon Critchley notes in his collection of lectures *The Problem with Levinas*, it is important for Levinas that anarchy does not simply become another arche or simply a different kind of order (Critchley 2015, 70-73). Though Critchley tries to argue for a link between anarchy in Levinas and political anarchism in his book *Infinitely Demanding*, he makes it clear that this link is a critical extension of Levinas not found in Levinas's writings themselves. Connecting the two Greek meanings of the word arche, Critchley says, "Anarchy cannot, therefore, be a new ordering principle, a new arkhê. It cannot reign. It can only take place as the disruption of order and not a new order" (Critchley 2015, 72). In his own writing about writing books, Levinas makes this point about the necessary difficulty or "fine risk" of writing about anarchy. He says, "Language is nevertheless able to speak of it [the very enigmatic anarchy which is the face], thereby confirming the impossibility of the an-archic constituting itself as a sovereignty, whence the very noncondition of anarchy. Yet the hold of language over the anarchic is not a mastery, for otherwise anarchy would be subordinated to the arche of consciousness" (Levinas, "Substitution," Basic Philosophical Writings, 91 note 34). 
> There is another place where he defends his writing of books in light of avoiding anarchy becoming an arche. Note 19 on p 195-6 of OTB is in the direction, but not quite what I remember. this note may be another iteration of the note from the earlier version of Substitution cited above. I wonder if it would be instructive to reflect also on his famous quote about books here?

>that I am also struck by the potential poetic movement of *délire de lire* in our exploration of the cultural production of bible.

Despite the semantic negation built into the word an-archy, I am uninterested in arguing for the absence of original. In my early attempts to articulate this anarchy in the realm of translation studies through a talk titled "From Murder to Anarchy" at the Nida School of Translation Studies 2014, I fear I had fallen into the trap of archaizing the anarchic by arguing for the eradication of the notion of original in the process of translation. The conversations with translators who have spent their lives caring for and working with both biblical and literary texts taught me that we needn't eschew the presence, value, and operation of an original or source text in the process of translation in order to question said original's governance over the validity or even methodology of a translation. We can always construct an original given a particular data set and time frame. Instead of eradicating any notion of original, I am asking us to consider a kind of reading, a mode of making, that operates *without the reign of an original*. In this vein, anarchy becomes one mechanism for the probabilistic production offered by interfaces that we discussed in chapter 1.

### proximity: encounter without grasp (proximity in Levinas) texts/books are
not anarchic, but reading practices can be - anarchy is an encounter, not a
property, thus the important of proximity

### examples: Benjamin (literary montage), De Certeau (never a blank page),
### Parker (living text of Gospels)

Being formed in my teen age and early adult years by evangelical christian culture, the committment to original intent and original manuscript autographs as the arbitrer of meaning was deeply ingrained. The possibility of bible as simulacrum or as anything other than the witness to the originary divine revelation made no sense in this culture. If this doxa was questioned within my evangelical community, it was met with a socially acceptable means of excommunication. In an early doctoral seminar on paleography and text criticism, I was exposed to David Parker's book, The Living Text of the Gospels. Parker was one of the first serious textualists to challenge my notion of original as the "real" or as the metanarrative legitimating meaning as we read these texts. In general, Parker uses variation within the manuscript tradition of early christian texts that would come to make up what we call the bible today, particularly gospel manuscripts, to suggest that gospels are a tradition, not a law. During an analysis of variations in manuscripts regarding Jesus's comments on marriage and divorce, Parker says, "The quest for a Law in the teachings of Jesus cannot be pursued in the face "of the evidence that, for those early Christians who passed the tradition to "us, there was--no law, but a tradition whose meaning had to be kept alive by "reflection and reinterpretation (Parker, Living Text, 93).

Parker suggests that with the gospel tradition, meaning is practiced, not
dictated by or excavated from an original. In his own nod to a preference for
genealogy over archaeology, relationship over lineage, Parker suggests,

"The attempt to discern earlier forms of a text , from which those known to us
"are descended, is an essential task in the critical study of Christian
"origins.  It does not follow that it is also necessary to recover a single
"original text (Parker, Living Text, 208).

Though I find his idea of the study of Christian origins a bit ironic in the
context of his anarchic notion of the biblical tradition, I admire his
willingness to question the doxa of the original text while still holding a
deep sense of meaning possibilities in the gospel tradition. He helped open a
world for me. He altered my habitus by offering a new set of possibilities to
shape my dispositions, by begging questions i couldn't even yet imagine.

Taking a very different approach, Tim Beal in *The Rise and Fall of the Bible*, also raises some questions that challenge the cultural notions of bible and book. Driven in part by a curiosity around the continued rise in bible production and sales alongside what seems to be a decline in biblical literacy in America (QUOTE), Beal questions our typical ingrained notions of the relationship between literary production and consumption. He suggests that the meaning and value of the bible in America may have little to do with the accessibility and relevance of the texts inside these books that carry on the ancient manuscript tradition. Instead, it is the cultural iconicity of the bible that generates its value and meaning. Perhaps this cultural iconicity is akin to the reality principle that Baudrillard talks about in Disneyland? People buy bibles not because they actually think they will find some original meaning in these ancient texts that will be relevant to their contemporary life, but because the cultural idea of bible offers a promise that "truth" or "reality" still exist. No doubt, Beal is on to something when he suggests that this cultural idea of bible as a locus of singular and univocal truth is bound up in the codex technologies that came to hold in one volume the entire libraries that constituted the various community collections that were called scrolls but came to be know as bible (Beal, Rise and Fall, Kindle location, 2032-46). In so far as this cultural idea of bible prevails, the bible as stable truth or "the real," the cultural value of the bible is married to the the cultural vlaue placed on the codex. Yet, the codex is losing its grip on the reality principle with the advent of e-books, cloud collections, and searchability that gives us new "books" made up of fragments from many sources and with little regard for their location in their "original" narratives. How will the cultural iconicity of the bible fare in this new marketplace?

Like Parker, Beal too problematizes the dominant conception of the bible as a
singular book with a stable original. Interestingly, both authors make this
argument using the cultural capital valued in the bible context, antiquity,
which can easily slide into a sense of recovering an original. Nonetheless,
Beal describes the early manuscript tradition of the bible as a collection of
texts from many sources and many contexts that "were not the same from copy to
copy. There was no beginning and no end to them, no first and last page. They
did not have one author or one voice. They were not read in a linear way, but
they were read around in. And they grew through interpretation" (Beal, Rise
and Fall, 2046). Beal offers this imagination of the bible as a multivocal,
polyvalent and dynamic library to challenge the doxa of the bible as "the
literal Word of God and closed book of answers" (Beal, Rise and Fall, 2032).
Just before this quote, Beal suggests that this cultural imagination of bible
as reality principle is already dead, so he goes on to articulate an
alternative imagination of the bible as "a space that hosts accidental
revelation" (Beal, Rise and Fall, Kindle location 2060), an infinite cycle of
production littered with intrigue and surprise as meaning is made in practice.
