INTRODUCTION: TRANSLATING BOOK

Book is undergoing a major media transition as print wanes in its
dominance and the internet and mobile devices transform our reading
habits. With the ever entangled histories of bible and book, *this
emerging media age and its transformation of reading practices begs us
to imagine bible as an anarchic interface, a space of contact where
meaning is produced without the reign of an original*.

Thinking of bible as an interface rather than simply as a container for
content will allow us to explore the possibilities of emerging
technologies to translate and transform enduring traditions of bible
reading into the coming media age without succumbing to the temptations
of typical media binaries of new and old, good and bad. As we consider
the design of book interfaces that provoke probabilistic production in
the practice of reading, I will advocate for attention to an affordance
of anarchy that dethrones the governing role of a singular original
without eradicating useful historical relations. Bible reading
communities throughout history have provided some models for this
anarchic interface and can provide important guidance and wisdom as we
explore emerging media capacities for our relationship with books.

Building on Johanna Drucker's work with interface theory and the
Humanities, I will begin with a look at interface as a way of
interrupting the container notion of book and suggesting a greater focus
on relationality and reading practices in our discussion of media
transitions and reading interface design. Then, based on the philosophy
of Emmanuel Levinas, I will argue for an anarchic relationality that
ought to shape our interface design toward creative encounter that
resists emerging media dispositions toward consumption. With the
possibility and value of anarchic interface established, I will then
suggest ways to pursue bible as anarchic interface in our emerging media
age. A look back at the performance of anarchic interface on the
Talmudic page and in illuminated medieval manuscripts will inform our
both the theory and design of our interfaces. Finally, I will beckon us
forward by offering two experiments that highlight the challenges and
possibilities of anarchic interface design and will offer some
possibilities in light of the pervasive anxiety about human relationship
and reading practices in today's media environment.

Before we get started into our exploration of interface, why even bother
with these questions of bible, book, and technology?

**Emergence of a Medium**

From the birth of the codex to the fall of the bible, medium has
mattered in the life of bible both in its necessary entanglement with
content and in its significant social effects. In *The Birth of the
Codex*,[^1] Roberts and Skeat give us a careful look at the storied
material history of the technology that has come to dominate our
cultural idea of book, the codex. Nearly half of the pages of their own
codex are devoted to the role of early Christian practices of scripture
in the rise of the codex to prominence as a book technology, with this
bold claim emerging from their analysis of the manuscript data:[^2]

![](media/image1.tiff){width="6.5in" height="2.765277777777778in"}

Acknowledging the difficulty of firmly establishing the ‘biblical’
category and signaling their sensitivity to the narrow provenance of
manuscript evidence, all in Egypt, Roberts and Skeat still resoundingly
suggest that bible as book begins exclusively as a papyrus codex. Newer
manuscript evidence and different approaches to categories have
challenged the ‘always’ of this conclusion. Yet, the strangeness of this
early Christian preference for codex has been reinforced by many more
recent explorations of this evidence.[^3]

In a book that deeply shaped my own ideas about the adoption of codex
technology by Christians, *Books and Readers*,[^4] Harry Gamble focuses
more on the readerly use of early Christian texts than on their literary
production. Though he may differ in his conclusions from Roberts and
Skeat, there is little doubt that bible played a part in the emergence
of a new interface.[^5] In my own work on the book as a technology for
scripture in antiquity, I found a combination of Gamble, Epp, and
O'Donnell provided a compelling picture of the usefulness of the
portable notebook becoming associated with Christian leaders, and hence
with authority.[^6]

**Twilight of an Icon **

The first chapter of Timothy Beal’s book *The Rise and Fall of the
Bible* is titled ‘The End of the Word as we Know It,’ and he feels
fine.[^7]

![](media/image2.tiff){width="6.5in" height="2.577777777777778in"}

The cultural iconicity of 'the Bible' as 'the Book of books' that is
undergoing deconstruction is the bible as authoritative, univocal,
practical, accessible, comprehensive, and exclusive.[^8] As Beal also
notes, it is not a coincidence that this transformation of the bible as
cultural icon coincides with a major cultural translation of the book as
a medium.[^9]

![](media/image3.tiff){width="6.5in" height="1.7222222222222223in"}

Just as in antiquity, bible played a role in the emergence of a new book
technology, so today, bible as book is entangled in a media transition
from the reign of print to a proliferation of interfaces in our emerging
media age.

**Medium Matters **

In *Understanding Media: The Extensions of Man*,[^10] Marshall McLuhan
points us toward the cracks in the reign of print, that illustrious
descendent of the codex, in the face of an emerging electronic age.
McLuhan reminds us that technologies (media) are extensions of
ourselves and that the message of every medium is its effect on our
social relations.[^11]

![](media/image4.tiff){width="6.5in" height="3.1791666666666667in"}

Beyond the obvious and important entanglement of form and content,
McLuhan emphasizes the impact of technologies on human relationship with
the world and one another through a ‘change of scale’ not simply a
newness of kind.[^12]

![](media/image5.tiff){width="6.5in" height="1.3527777777777779in"}

Here, McLuhan challenges our binary tendencies between new and old and
suggests that media emerge as a change in ‘existing processes’ that
inevitably have social consequences. It is precisely this change in
existing processes we find in the amplification of non-linear access
from the emergence of the codex to the ubiquity of digital search.
McLuhan suggests that the content of every ‘new’ medium is another
existing medium.[^13] Just as the codex performed the multiple columns
per page of a scroll, so internet search performs and amplifies the
print index. I refer to this phenomenon of media building upon and
containing its predecessors as *material media translation*. The
language of translation is helpful here because it signals that all
media transformations involve a negotiation between new and old with
inevitable loss and gain. I use the phrase 'material media' to qualify
this translation to differentiate this process from the common process
of translation of texts into other forms of media such as sound and
film. In material media translation, it is the materiality of the
interface of the medium that is translated, not simply its 'content,'
whatever that might entail.

My favorite material metaphor for this process of material media
translation is a palimpsest, a manuscript that has been written on,
erased, and then written on again. With each new medium writing over an
existing medium (or many media) with only partial erasure, material
media translation enacts a kind of palimpsest. Below is an image of a
page from *Codex Ephraemi Rescriptus*,[^14] a fifth century manuscript
of biblical texts in Greek, washed and written over in the 12th century
with Greek translations of the fourth century Syriac writings of Ephrem
the Syrian. This beautiful material enactment of palimpsest, two column
miniscule Greek translations of Syriac over single column uncial Greek
biblical texts, illustrates marvelously the process of emerging media
building upon existing structures to make something new.

![](media/image6.tiff){width="6.5in" height="4.875in"}

**Figure 1: Image of Codex Ephraemi Rescriptus 1v**[^15]

In light of this process of material media translation as palimpsest,
remembering bible's rich media history will provide a helpful context
and data for imagining how bible might be practiced as interface amidst
the changing reading dispositions of our emerging media age. The
material media translation of book from manuscript page to mobile screen
already has and will continue to shape our reading practices. Focusing
on book as interface, a space for encounter, will highlight the
importance of the materiality of these interfaces in producing our
reading practices.

[^1]: Colin H. Roberts and T. C. Skeat. *The Birth of Codex* (London:
    Oxford University Press, 1970).

[^2]: Roberts and Skeat, *Birth of Codex*, 42. I have elected to embed
    images of block quotes from the interface in which I read them to
    signal the multimedia and intertextual nature of my work. Allowing
    the images to interrupt the flow of letters can encourage us to
    engage these other voices as material artifacts that may have
    different material affordances than those at work in this document.

[^3]: Examples to come.

[^4]: Harry Y. Gamble, *Books and Readers in the Early Church: A History
    of Early Christian Texts* (New Haven, Yale University Press,
    1995)..cLuhan, \*l ions of ManHoughton Mifflinf an Accidental Book
    (Boston: Harcourt voices as material artifacts that may have differ

[^5]: Add a sample from Gamble here about emergence of codex in xian use
    and add a note about other perspectives on role of bible in codex
    development - Gamble, Hurtado, etc. Offer p.oxy 1075 and nongbri
    article as an example.

[^6]: Expand a bit here and cite Epp, O’Donnell, and Wagner.

[^7]: Timothy K. Beal, The Rise and Fall of the Bible: The Unexpected
    History of an Accidental Book (Boston: Houghton Mifflin Harcourt,
    2011), Kindle edition, location 371. See
    <https://youtu.be/Z0GFRcFm-aY> for a sense of the cultural reference
    embedded in this chapter title.

[^8]: Beal, *Rise and Fall*, Kindle location 121-122.

[^9]: Beal, *Rise and Fall*, kindle location 1161.

[^10]: Marshall McLuhan, *Understanding Media: The Extensions of Man*
    (New York: McGraw-Hill, 1964).

[^11]: McLuhan, *Understanding Media*, 7-8.

[^12]: McLuhan, *Understanding Media*, 8.

[^13]: McLuhan, *Understanding Media*, 8.

[^14]: [*http://gallica.bnf.fr/ark:/12148/btv1b8470433r*](http://gallica.bnf.fr/ark:/12148/btv1b8470433r)

[^15]: Codex Ephraemi Rescriptus 1v view 15,
    <http://gallica.bnf.fr/ark:/12148/btv1b8470433r/f15.item> taken from
    the iOS app Gallica by Bibliothèque nationale de France
    (https://appsto.re/us/FhPFH.i).
