**Hemenway Dissertation Outline**

Title: Bible as Anarchic Interface

Thesis: The book is undergoing a major media transition as print wanes
in its dominance and the internet and mobile devices transform our
reading habits. With the entangled histories of bible and book--the
bible is, after all, the book of books--this emerging media age and its
transformation of reading practices forces us to imagine bible as
something beyond the book. In my dissertation, I propose that digital
media create the possibility to engage bible as an *anarchic interface.*
I call it an *interface* in order to stress that bible readers are more
than just passive consumers of the words they read; they are also makers
of meaning. I describe this interface as *anarchic* because the word’s
etymology means both without a beginning and without a reign. Thus, an
anarchic interface is a space of contact where meaning is produced
without the reign of an original*.* So much modern biblical
interpretation has been about finding the original meaning in the text,
but such a quest is at best elusive and at worst an illusion. An
anarchic interface provides the opportunity to think of biblical
interpretation entirely differently. Thinking of bible as an interface
rather than simply as a container for content allows us to explore the
way emerging technologies can translate and transform enduring
traditions of bible reading into the coming media age in ways that
transcend the usual media binaries of writer/reader, producer/consumer,
form/content, right/wrong.

Introduction: Translating Book

1.  Interface – How does interface theory shape the way we understand
    reading practices?

    a.  Zone of Encounter (Drucker)

    b.  Interface as Thirdspace (Soja and Lefebvre)

    c.  Interface as Process and Product (Piotr Blumczynski)

    d.  Book as Interface (Drucker and The Academic Book of the
        Future Project)

2.  Anarchic – Can meaning be constructed without recourse to a single
    starting point or fundamental principle?

    a.  Without Reign of Original (Levinas)

    b.  Proximity - Encounter Without Grasp ( Levinas)

    c.  Anarchic Readings

        i.  Walter Benjamin (literary montage)

        ii. Michel De Certeau (never a blank page),

        iii. David Parker (living text of Gospels)

3.  Bible – How does the changing media landscape impact the reading
    practices of bible?

    a.  Mediating Bible - Why Bother? (from Origen to McLuhan to Foley)

    b.  End of the Word as We Know It (Beal)

    c.  Bible as Book of Books (Levinas)

4.  Material Anarchy – In what ways has bible implicitly operated as an
    anarchic interface in print?

    a.  Affording Anarchy - N. Katherine Hayles's media specific
        analysis

    b.  A Talmudic Page

    c.  Illuminated Bible Manuscripts

5.  Digital Anarchy – Do emerging digital technologies enhance bible as
    anarchic interface?

    a.  Bible Gateway - an internet bible interface

    b.  YouVersion's bible app - a mobile bible interface

Conclusion
